Let's press on to something way more
challenging than what we've already done,
which, to be fair, before we knew
JavaScript would have been tricky.
Although there's ways to get around that,
but that's a whole other conversation.
The concept of time.
So fun fact, I was a philosophy major,
so if you wanna like,
just totally like geek out about
like what is the nature of time and
our existential expectations,
like, I'm your girl.
But, JavaScript also has
its own philosophical
interpretation of what is time.
And it's a little tricky, at least,
in my experience and in I think
the entire rest of the web's experience
because it is something that we,
over the years as a JavaScript community,
have come up with,
hopefully increasingly useful
solutions for, but it is a problem.
Time is a problem.
Is it just me that feels that way?
Especially, it's like where
did the years go this rate?
Okay, so asynchronous JavaScript,
we're jumping all the way from
the document getElementById
to the fancy new features
of a very complex syntactic
sugar situation that is
known as async await.
Have folks written async functions or
used the await keyword to
await async functions?
Excellent, so reviewing,
we declare an async function with
the async keyword in front of function.
And when we have an async function, like
for example, the built-in fetch function,
which is part of the browser APIs,
which we're going to talk about later,
is asynchronous.
And so we can await it to wait for
that value that needs some
time to be figured out,
which internally is represented
by a promise of a value.
We wait for that promise to resolve,
ideally, it resolves and doesn't reject.
And then we can capture that value and
use it through the rest of our code.
So, we're all on the same page?
Excellent.
But I have a question,
why do we have to do all this?
Like, what is going on with all this
promises and these asynchronous things?
And, why can't we just like run the code?
Why can't I just say,
response equals fetch.
Like why do I have to await it?
>> Yeah.
>> Pesky users expect to do other things.
>> JavaScript is a single
threaded language.
>> JavaScript is
a single-threaded language.
So yeah, those are simple answers.
And correct, but also,
like, what is any of that?
At least when I was
starting out in JavaScript,
after learning some of the mechanics of,
okay, I type this magical formula,
and then poof,
my web page does what I want it to do,
I found it very useful to dig in a little
bit to what is happening here and
why we need to do this stuff,
the async, await, promises, etc.
So as we said, some stuff,
it's just a fact of life.
Sometimes stuff takes time.
In my life,
I feel like stuff always takes so
much more time than I think it's going to.
And that is generally true around
anyone who builds software.
If you ask them how long it will take for
them to build the given software,
whatever their answer is, triple it.
And that goes for yourself, don't do
as I do, do as I say, yeah, me too.
Anyways, all right, but as mentioned,
the browser needs to stay responsive.
If it takes a while to go talk to like
the dog CEO API, or whatever fun,
the Star Wars API, whatever fun API or
whatever it is that I'm doing
that takes a long time,
that's just life, stuff takes time.
But I have users, and
users don't wanna sit there unable to
click on anything or
interact with anything else on the page.
The browser needs to stay responsive
to any events that the user is doing,
any interactions that
they're trying to make.
And, complicating factors,
JavaScript is a single-threaded language,
which those of us who have a lot more
experience in operating systems and
lower level programming and
things like that can expound upon later.
But for our intents and purposes,
it basically means that JavaScript
can only do one thing at a time.
It can't simultaneously be
fetching this resource and
also running an event handler function
that I passed in to a listener I set up.
So, what does this mean for our lives?
This is a very exciting drawing I made,
about a lot of stuff that is happening
when we do stuff in JavaScript.
Don't know how to get that to go away,
so I'm just gonna move it.
Okay, so this is a simplified
diagram of what is happening inside
of the magical creature we
know as the web browser.
So, inside our browsers, sorry,
let me bring my slides back.
We have a JavaScript runtime,
or JavaScript engine.
These are separate entities
from the browser itself,
which also has its own browser engine
that's doing a whole bunch of other stuff
we're gonna talk about in a second.
But you might have heard of these or
be familiar with the V8 engine
is what runs in Chrome and also Node,
and Firefox has a different engine.
It's called SpiderMonkey,
different JavaScript engine.
There's others.
All the browsers got their own fun little
thing, although it seems like they're,
there's increasingly V8 is sort of
taking over this space, but in any case.
In order to run JavaScript,
you need a runtime for JavaScript.
So that is part of the browser.
The browser has this
JavaScript environment and
inside of the JavaScript world,
JavaScript has a call stack.
So this is essentially where
the code to run a given function,
when you call it kind of stacks up and
sits at the top of the stack
while it's running.
And when it's finished,
it pops off of the stack.
And if your function calls another
function that calls another function,
you get these what are called stack
frames, one for each function call,
stacking up, so
that the function your function called has
to return before your function can return.
So, that is what we call the call stack.
We've got these functions
kind of piling up.
So basically, the functions stack
up on the stack in frames, and
they run to completion.
With an asterisk, literally, and and
then they pop off the stack
magically when they're done.
Now meanwhile, functions need
data to do stuff with, right?
And so all of that data
has to live somewhere, and
it lives in a beautiful,
very tidy place in memory called the heap,
which probably looks a lot like my room in
that it's just a big pile of random crap.
So essentially the heap is a sort
of disorganized collection.
Well, disorganized in the sense that
everything is just sort of sitting
around wherever.
All of these different bits of data, which
in JavaScript are objects are just all
sitting around in the heap, but they have
useful references like variable names and
addresses and things like that,
that we can then use to
do whatever the function on
the stacks thinks that needs to do.
So we talked in the JavaScript
first steps course
about pointers from a variable to
an object that's in memory somewhere.
And this is all happening
within JavaScript.
So we've got the call stack
where the function stack up.
We've got the heap where data piles
up in a big old pile of memory.
But this is not enough to
make a browser run and
make the whole web page work.
There is other stuff going on.
So the browser has a whole
bunch of other stuff going on.
Like, for example,
it's interpreting your CSS.
It's parsing your HTML.
It's doing all kinds of nonsense.
It's reading your operating system and
what you got going on in your, which media
devices you gave a permission to,
which we're gonna talk about later, etc.
But for our intents and purposes as
JavaScript developers we care most about
a couple of things that it's doing.
So the problem, again, is that some
stuff in the browser takes time.
Like for example, Fetch.
Fetch is what we call a browser API.
We access it from JavaScript, but
the browser is really what knows how
to fetch something, how to fetch
a resource, which you can also see all
of those network requests in your
network tab in the DevTools, yeah?
So what happens is, if something
takes a long time to complete,
we don't want the browser to
frees up because JavaScript,
with its one little thread, is still doing
something, still fetching, or still,
I don't know, running some very
complex math equation or something.
We want that browser to stay responsive.
So the browser has a little queue
where essentially schedules like,
this is the next thing that you should
do JavaScript when you have a second.
So kind of like a little like a to-do
list for the JavaScript engine.
Like okay, when you get to it, can you
please go to the store and grab some milk?
Thank you.
[LAUGH] So what we've got is a queue
where these messages kind of get in line.
And each of the messages is basically
going to say to JavaScript,
hey, this function is what I need
you to put on the stack next.
But we can't just Willy nilly be
throwing function calls onto the stack
because other stuff is already at
the top of the stack, it's running.
So if I throw something on top of it,
then JavaScript would be running that,
it runs whatever is top most.
And it don't only run one thing at a time.
So if I were just chaotically throwing
new function calls onto the stack
at random times, everything would become
chaos, and we would live in a nonsense,
abstract universe of just particles
swirling around in the ether.
Wait.
Okay, so the the point is that
there needs to be some way to
sync up this message queue with
what's happening on the stack.
And that is what is called the event loop.
Very simple but crucial part of this whole
equation, where essentially the browser is
running a continuous loop that's
checking the queue for any to-do items.
And if there's a to-do item,
and the stack is empty,
it's going to push that next stack
frame onto the JavaScript stack.
It's gonna give JavaScript a task to do.
But it's going to keep checking
as long as it needs to for
the stack to be ready to
accept that to-do list item.
Just like you see someone carrying
a big pile of grocery bags and stuff,
you don't wanna be like, yeah,
can you also go get some milk right now?
No, it's how you make enemies,
or so I hear.
[LAUGH] The event loop is this very simple
loop that's essentially running and
constantly scheduling the to-do
items that the browser or sorry,
it's executing or getting JavaScript
to execute the to-do items
that the browser has been kind of
queuing up or scheduling to happen.
So, this is all a kind of
a very high level overview,
a very simplified overview of some
of the things that our browsers
are doing all the time while
we're looking at cat memes.
And the event loop is one
of those things where,
well, this whole model of the queue and
the stack and
all of this stuff has some
interesting implications for
how time feels in JavaScript.
And sometimes we get unexpected results
in terms of things running before or
after we expected them to because all of
the details of this are largely obscured.
And like I, for example,
was writing JavaScript for
quite a while before I
understood this at all.
And would I say that I 100% understand
everything about what's happening in a web
browser?
Again, absolutely not.
There is so much happening in a browser,
it is one of the most complicated
programs, I think,
that we generally use every day.
And there's a lot to learn about it.
So good, there's an image, okay.
So the idea is that now you know
everything about the browser.
No, one does not simply completely
explain complex situations
with a single diagram or meme.
But don't worry, I don't have
a single meme in these slides.
As I have many, many memes, which
hopefully will be loading appropriately.
But if you would like to dig deeper,
I recommended this talk also in
the JavaScript first steps course,
but this is an amazing talk on YouTube
by Philip Roberts called What
the heck is the event loop anyway?.
It's from, I wanna say, 2015 or
something around there, and
it's a really, really great,
much more detailed,
much more thorough explanation of all
of the stuff we just talked about.